# GettingAndCleaningDataCourseProject

## Background Summary:

The data of interest in this analysis was collected by capturing the accelerometer and gyroscope sensor readings on a Samsung Galaxy while on a subject's waist during six different activities: WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, and LAYING. The raw data was processed to calculate 561 features for each sampling of the raw data. These feature vectors provided in the X_train and X_test files and were the data analyzed by the run_analysis script. Please see References below for more detail on the experiment and measurements.

## The Analysis Script:

The run_analysis scripts expects the following files to be in the working directory:
- activity_labels.txt : to get the descriptive names for each activity.
- features.txt : to get the descriptive names for 561 features included in the data
- subject_train.txt - associated subjects with train records
- subject_test.txt - associated subjects with test record
- X_train.txt - actual train data
- X_test.txt - actual test data
- y_train.txt - associated activity labels for train records
- y_test.txt - associated activity labels for test records

The script first loads the dplyr library to more easily manipulate the data for the analysis. Then it reads in all the features from features.txt and utilizes grep to exact the columns names and numbers for only those features that are means or standard deviations. Then it reads in all the test and training data along with the associated activity labels and subjects. Next the script utilizes the column numbers generated by searching the features to only keep the columns of data in which we are interested in the test and training data tables. The columns identifying the subject and activity for each set of features are added to the tables before they are combined into one complete table. The full table now has the subject, activity label, and the desired features in each row or sample. 

The final data set is required to contain the averages (or mean) for each feature by activity and subject. To create this table, the full table mentioned above was first grouped by the activity label and subject using the group_by function in the dplyr package. Then the summarize_all function was used to get the mean of the remaining columns for each activity-subject pair. 

Finally, in order to effectively replace the activity labels (which are integers 1-6) with the activity they represent the script reads the activity_labels file to create a table with each number and its associated description in each row. This table is then merged with the final data set created above on the label number column.  This adds a new column with the activity description for each sample. The column with label numbers is removed and this table is then written to the file tidy_data.txt. 

For information regarding each of the feature variables please refer to the CodeBook.md file provided in this repository.

## REFERENCES:

The information below was the README and features_info file included with the data set and is referenced above. 

## README file:
==================================================================
### Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset
### Version 1.0
==================================================================
### Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto.
### Smartlab - Non Linear Complex Systems Laboratory
### DITEN - Università degli Studi di Genova.
### Via Opera Pia 11A, I-16145, Genoa, Italy.
### activityrecognition@smartlab.ws
### www.smartlab.ws
==================================================================

The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain. See 'features_info.txt' for more details. 

### For each record it is provided:
======================================

- Triaxial acceleration from the accelerometer (total acceleration) and the estimated body acceleration.
- Triaxial Angular velocity from the gyroscope. 
- A 561-feature vector with time and frequency domain variables. 
- Its activity label. 
- An identifier of the subject who carried out the experiment.

### The dataset includes the following files:
=========================================

- 'README.txt'

- 'features_info.txt': Shows information about the variables used on the feature vector.

- 'features.txt': List of all features.

- 'activity_labels.txt': Links the class labels with their activity name.

- 'train/X_train.txt': Training set.

- 'train/y_train.txt': Training labels.

- 'test/X_test.txt': Test set.

- 'test/y_test.txt': Test labels.

The following files are available for the train and test data. Their descriptions are equivalent. 

- 'train/subject_train.txt': Each row identifies the subject who performed the activity for each window sample. Its range is from 1 to 30. 

- 'train/Inertial Signals/total_acc_x_train.txt': The acceleration signal from the smartphone accelerometer X axis in standard gravity units 'g'. Every row shows a 128 element vector. The same description applies for the 'total_acc_x_train.txt' and 'total_acc_z_train.txt' files for the Y and Z axis. 

- 'train/Inertial Signals/body_acc_x_train.txt': The body acceleration signal obtained by subtracting the gravity from the total acceleration. 

- 'train/Inertial Signals/body_gyro_x_train.txt': The angular velocity vector measured by the gyroscope for each window sample. The units are radians/second. 

### Notes: 
======
- Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].
- Each feature vector is a row on the text file.

For more information about this dataset contact: activityrecognition@smartlab.ws

### License:
========
Use of this dataset in publications must be acknowledged by referencing the following publication [1] 

[1] Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a Multiclass Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. International Workshop of Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012

This dataset is distributed AS-IS and no responsibility implied or explicit can be addressed to the authors or their institutions for its use or misuse. Any commercial use is prohibited.

Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Davide Anguita. November 2012.

## features_info file:

### Feature Selection 
=================

The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

tBodyAcc-XYZ
tGravityAcc-XYZ
tBodyAccJerk-XYZ
tBodyGyro-XYZ
tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
tBodyAccMag
tGravityAccMag
tBodyAccJerkMag
tBodyGyroMag
tBodyGyroJerkMag
fBodyAcc-XYZ
fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
fBodyGyro-XYZ
fBodyAccMag
fBodyAccJerkMag
fBodyGyroMag
fBodyGyroJerkMag

The set of variables that were estimated from these signals are: 

mean(): Mean value
std(): Standard deviation
mad(): Median absolute deviation 
max(): Largest value in array
min(): Smallest value in array
sma(): Signal magnitude area
energy(): Energy measure. Sum of the squares divided by the number of values. 
iqr(): Interquartile range 
entropy(): Signal entropy
arCoeff(): Autorregresion coefficients with Burg order equal to 4
correlation(): correlation coefficient between two signals
maxInds(): index of the frequency component with largest magnitude
meanFreq(): Weighted average of the frequency components to obtain a mean frequency
skewness(): skewness of the frequency domain signal 
kurtosis(): kurtosis of the frequency domain signal 
bandsEnergy(): Energy of a frequency interval within the 64 bins of the FFT of each window.
angle(): Angle between to vectors.

Additional vectors obtained by averaging the signals in a signal window sample. These are used on the angle() variable:

gravityMean
tBodyAccMean
tBodyAccJerkMean
tBodyGyroMean
tBodyGyroJerkMean

The complete list of variables of each feature vector is available in 'features.txt'
